## 1–2 Electric and magnetic fields

First, we must extend, somewhat, our ideas of the electric and magnetic vectors, \mathbf{E} and \mathbf{B} . We have defined them in terms of the forces that are felt by a charge. We wish now to speak of electric and magnetic fields at a point even when there is no charge present. We are saying, in effect, that since there are forces “acting on” the charge, there is still “something” there when the charge is removed. If a charge located at the point (x,y,z) at the time t feels the force \mathbf{F} given by Eq. ( 1.1) we associate the vectors \mathbf{E} and \mathbf{B} with the point in space (x,y,z) . We may think of \mathbf{E}(x,y,z,t) and \mathbf{B}(x,y,z,t) as giving the forces that would be experienced at the time t by a charge located at (x,y,z) , with the condition that placing the charge there did not disturb the positions or motions of all the other charges responsible for the fields.

Following this idea, we associate with every point (x,y,z) in space two vectors \mathbf{E} and \mathbf{B} , which may be changing with time. The electric and magnetic fields are, then, viewed as vector functions of x , y , z , and t . Since a vector is specified by its components, each of the fields \mathbf{E}(x,y,z,t) and \mathbf{B}(x,y,z,t) represents three mathematical functions of x , y , z , and t .

It is precisely because \mathbf{E} (or \mathbf{B} ) can be specified at every point in space that it is called a “field.” A “field” is any physical quantity which takes on different values at different points in space. Temperature, for example, is a field—in this case a scalar field, which we write as T(x,y,z) . The temperature could also vary in time, and we would say the temperature field is time-dependent, and write T(x,y,z,t) . Another example is the “velocity field” of a flowing liquid. We write \mathbf{v}(x,y,z,t) for the velocity of the liquid at each point in space at the time t . It is a vector field.

Returning to the electromagnetic fields—although they are produced by charges according to complicated formulas, they have the following important characteristic: the relationships between the values of the fields at one point and the values at a nearby point are very simple. With only a few such relationships in the form of differential equations we can describe the fields completely. It is in terms of such equations that the laws of electrodynamics are most simply written.

There have been various inventions to help the mind visualize the behavior of fields. The most correct is also the most abstract: we simply consider the fields as mathematical functions of position and time. We can also attempt to get a mental picture of the field by drawing vectors at many points in space, each of which gives the field strength and direction at that point. Such a representation is shown in Fig. 1–1 . We can go further, however, and draw lines which are everywhere tangent to the vectors—which, so to speak, follow the arrows and keep track of the direction of the field. When we do this we lose track of the lengths of the vectors, but we can keep track of the strength of the field by drawing the lines far apart when the field is weak and close together when it is strong. We adopt the convention that the number of lines per unit area at right angles to the lines is proportional to the field strength. This is, of course, only an approximation, and it will require, in general, that new lines sometimes start up in order to keep the number up to the strength of the field. The field of Fig. 1–1 is represented by field lines in Fig. 1–2 .

Fig. 1–1.A vector field may be represented by drawing a set of arrows whose magnitudes and directions indicate the values of the vector field at the points from which the arrows are drawn. Fig. 1–1.A vector field may be represented by drawing a set of arrows whose magnitudes and directions indicate the values of the vector field at the points from which the arrows are drawn. Fig. 1–2.A vector field can be represented by drawing lines which are tangent to the direction of the field vector at each point, and by drawing the density of lines proportional to the magnitude of the field vector. Fig. 1–2.A vector field can be represented by drawing lines which are tangent to the direction of the field vector at each point, and by drawing the density of lines proportional to the magnitude of the field vector.
