## 35–5 Cooling by adiabatic demagnetization

There is a very interesting special application of paramagnetism. At very low temperatures it is possible to line up the atomic magnets in a strong field. It is then possible to get down to extremely low temperatures by a process called adiabatic demagnetization. We can take a paramagnetic salt (for example, one containing a number of rare-earth atoms like praseodymium-ammonium-nitrate), and start by cooling it down with liquid helium to one or two degrees absolute in a strong magnetic field. Then the factor \mu B/kT is larger than 1 —say more like 2 or 3 . Most of the spins are lined up, and the magnetization is nearly saturated. Let’s say, to make it easy, that the field is very powerful and the temperature is very low, so that nearly all the atoms are lined up. Then you isolate the salt thermally (say, by removing the liquid helium and leaving a good vacuum) and turn off the magnetic field. The temperature of the salt goes way down.

Now if you were to turn off the field suddenly, the jiggling and shaking of the atoms in the crystal lattice would gradually knock all the spins out of alignment. Some of them would be up and some down. But if there is no field (and disregarding the interactions between the atomic magnets, which will make only a slight error), it takes no energy to turn over the atomic magnets. They could randomize their spins without any energy change and, therefore, without any temperature change.

Suppose, however, that while the atomic magnets are being flipped over by the thermal motion there is still some magnetic field present. Then it requires some work to flip them over opposite to the field— they must do work against the field. This takes energy from the thermal motions and lowers the temperature. So if the strong magnetic field is not removed too rapidly, the temperature of the salt will decrease—it is cooled by the demagnetization. From the quantum-mechanical view, when the field is strong all the atoms are in the lowest state, because the odds against any being in the upper state are impossibly big. But as the field is lowered, it gets more and more likely that thermal fluctuations will knock an atom into the upper state. When that happens, the atom absorbs the energy \Delta U=\mu_0B . So if the field is turned off slowly, the magnetic transitions can take energy out of the thermal vibrations of the crystal, cooling it off. It is possible in this way to go from a temperature of a few degrees absolute down to a temperature of a few thousandths of a degree.

Would you like to make something even colder than that? It turns out that Nature has provided a way. We have already mentioned that there are also magnetic moments for the atomic nuclei. Our formulas for paramagnetism work just as well for nuclei, except that the moments of nuclei are roughly a thousand times smaller. [They are of the order of magnitude of q\hbar/2m_p , where m_p is the proton mass, so they are smaller by the ratio of the masses of the electron and proton.] With such magnetic moments, even at a temperature of 2^\circ K, the factor \mu B/kT is only a few parts in a thousand. But if we use the paramagnetic demagnetization process to get down to a temperature of a few thousandths of a degree, \mu B/kT becomes a number near 1 —at these low temperatures we can begin to saturate the nuclear moments. That is good luck, because we can then use the adiabatic demagnetization of the nuclear magnetism to reach still lower temperatures. Thus it is possible to do two stages of magnetic cooling. First we use adiabatic demagnetization of paramagnetic ions to reach a few thousandths of a degree. Then we use the cold paramagnetic salt to cool some material which has a strong nuclear magnetism. Finally, when we remove the magnetic field from this material, its temperature will go down to within a millionth of a degree of absolute zero—if we have done everything very carefully.
