## 5–3 Equilibrium with conductors

There is no stable spot in the field of a system of fixed charges. What about a system of charged conductors? Can a system of charged conductors produce a field that will have a stable equilibrium point for a point charge? (We mean at a point other than on a conductor, of course.) You know that conductors have the property that charges can move freely around in them. Perhaps when the point charge is displaced slightly, the other charges on the conductors will move in a way that will give a restoring force to the point charge? The answer is still no—although the proof we have just given doesn’t show it. The proof for this case is more difficult, and we will only indicate how it goes.

First, we note that when charges redistribute themselves on the conductors, they can only do so if their motion decreases their total potential energy. (Some energy is lost to heat as they move in the conductor.) Now we have already shown that if the charges producing a field are stationary, there is, near any zero point P_0 in the field, some direction for which moving a point charge away from P_0 will decrease the energy of the system (since the force is away from P_0 ). Any readjustment of the charges on the conductors can only lower the potential energy still more, so (by the principle of virtual work) their motion will only increase the force in that particular direction away from P_0 , and not reverse it.

Our conclusions do not mean that it is not possible to balance a charge by electrical forces. It is possible if one is willing to control the locations or the sizes of the supporting charges with suitable devices. You know that a rod standing on its point in a gravitational field is unstable, but this does not prove that it cannot be balanced on the end of a finger. Similarly, a charge can be held in one spot by electric fields if they are variable. But not with a passive—that is, a static —system.
