## 6–6 The fields of charged conductors

We have now finished with the examples we wish to cover of situations in which the charge distribution is known from the start. It has been a problem without serious complications, involving at most some integrations. We turn now to an entirely new kind of problem, the determination of the fields near charged conductors.

Suppose that we have a situation in which a total charge Q is placed on an arbitrary conductor. Now we will not be able to say exactly where the charges are. They will spread out in some way on the surface. How can we know how the charges have distributed themselves on the surface? They must distribute themselves so that the potential of the surface is constant. If the surface were not an equipotential, there would be an electric field inside the conductor, and the charges would keep moving until it became zero. The general problem of this kind can be solved in the following way. We guess at a distribution of charge and calculate the potential. If the potential turns out to be constant everywhere on the surface, the problem is finished. If the surface is not an equipotential, we have guessed the wrong distribution of charges, and should guess again—hopefully with an improved guess! This can go on forever, unless we are judicious about the successive guesses.

The question of how to guess at the distribution is mathematically difficult. Nature, of course, has time to do it; the charges push and pull until they all balance themselves. When we try to solve the problem, however, it takes us so long to make each trial that that method is very tedious. With an arbitrary group of conductors and charges the problem can be very complicated, and in general it cannot be solved without rather elaborate numerical methods. Such numerical computations, these days, are set up on a computing machine that will do the work for us, once we have told it how to proceed.

On the other hand, there are a lot of little practical cases where it would be nice to be able to find the answer by some more direct method—without having to write a program for a computer. Fortunately, there are a number of cases where the answer can be obtained by squeezing it out of Nature by some trick or other. The first trick we will describe involves making use of solutions we have already obtained for situations in which charges have specified locations.
