## 18–5 The speed of light

We have a wave which leaves the material source and goes outward at the velocity c , which is the speed of light. But let’s go back a moment. From a historical point of view, it wasn’t known that the coefficient c in Maxwell’s equations was also the speed of light propagation. There was just a constant in the equations. We have called it c from the beginning, because we knew what it would turn out to be. We didn’t think it would be sensible to make you learn the formulas with a different constant and then go back to substitute c wherever it belonged. From the point of view of electricity and magnetism, however, we just start out with two constants, \epsilon_0 and c^2 , that appear in the equations of electrostatics and magnetostatics:

\mathbf{d}iv{\mathbf{E}} =\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_0} (18.14)

and

\mathbf{c}url{\mathbf{B}} =\frac{\mathbf{j}}{\epsilon_0 c^2}. (18.15)

If we take any arbitrary definition of a unit of charge, we can determine experimentally the constant \epsilon_0 required in Eq. ( 18.14)—say by measuring the force between two unit charges at rest, using Coulomb’s law. We must also determine experimentally the constant \epsilon_0 c^2 that appears in Eq. ( 18.15), which we can do, say, by measuring the force between two unit currents. (A unit current means one unit of charge per second.) The ratio of these two experimental constants is c^2 —just another “electromagnetic constant.”

Notice now that this constant c^2 is the same no matter what we choose for our unit of charge. If we put twice as much “charge”—say twice as many proton charges—in our “unit” of charge, \epsilon_0 would need to be one-fourth as large. When we pass two of these “unit” currents through two wires, there will be twice as much “charge” per second in each wire, so the force between two wires is four times larger. The constant \epsilon_0 c^2 must be reduced by one-fourth. But the ratio \epsilon_0 c^2/\epsilon_0 is unchanged.

So just by experiments with charges and currents we find a number c^2 which turns out to be the square of the velocity of propagation of electromagnetic influences. From static measurements—by measuring the forces between two unit charges and between two unit currents—we find that c=3.00\times10^8 meters/sec. When Maxwell first made this calculation with his equations, he said that bundles of electric and magnetic fields should be propagated at this speed. He also remarked on the mysterious coincidence that this was the same as the speed of light. “We can scarcely avoid the inference,” said Maxwell, “that light consists in the transverse undulations of the same medium which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena.”

Maxwell had made one of the great unifications of physics. Before his time, there was light, and there was electricity and magnetism. The latter two had been unified by the experimental work of Faraday, Oersted, and Ampère. Then, all of a sudden, light was no longer “something else,” but was only electricity and magnetism in this new form—little pieces of electric and magnetic fields which propagate through space on their own.

We have called your attention to some characteristics of this special solution, which turn out to be true, however, for any electromagnetic wave: that the magnetic field is perpendicular to the direction of motion of the wavefront; that the electric field is likewise perpendicular to the direction of motion of the wavefront; and that the two vectors \mathbf{E} and \mathbf{B} are perpendicular to each other. Furthermore, the magnitude of the electric field E is equal to c times the magnitude of the magnetic field B . These three facts—that the two fields are transverse to the direction of propagation, that \mathbf{B} is perpendicular to \mathbf{E} , and that E=cB —are generally true for any electromagnetic wave. Our special case is a good one—it shows all the main features of electromagnetic waves.
