## 18–1 Maxwell’s equations

In this chapter we come back to the complete set of the four Maxwell equations that we took as our starting point in Chapter 1. Until now, we have been studying Maxwell’s equations in bits and pieces; it is time to add one final piece, and to put them all together. We will then have the complete and correct story for electromagnetic fields that may be changing with time in any way. Anything said in this chapter that contradicts something said earlier is true and what was said earlier is false—because what was said earlier applied to such special situations as, for instance, steady currents or fixed charges. Although we have been very careful to point out the restrictions whenever we wrote an equation, it is easy to forget all of the qualifications and to learn too well the wrong equations. Now we are ready to give the whole truth, with no qualifications (or almost none).

The complete Maxwell equations are written in Table 18–1 , in words as well as in mathematical symbols. The fact that the words are equivalent to the equations should by this time be familiar—you should be able to translate back and forth from one form to the other.

| Maxwell’s equations |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| I. | \displaystyle\mathbf{d}iv{\mathbf{E}}=\frac{\rho}{\epsilon_0} | \text{(Flux of $\mathbf{E}$ through a closed surface)} =\text{(Charge inside)}/\epsilon_0 |
| II. | \displaystyle\mathbf{c}url{\mathbf{E}}=-\frac{\partial \mathbf{B}}{\partial t} | \text{(Line integral of $\mathbf{E}$ round a loop)} =\displaystyle-\frac{d }{d t}\text{(Flux of $\mathbf{B}$ through the loop)} |
| III. | \mathbf{d}iv{\mathbf{B}}=0 | \text{(Flux of $\mathbf{B}$ through a closed surface)} =0 |
| IV. | \displaystyle c^2\mathbf{c}url{\mathbf{B}}=\frac{\mathbf{j}}{\epsilon_0}+\frac{\partial \mathbf{E}}{\partial t} | c^2\text{(Integral of $\mathbf{B}$ around a loop)} =\text{(Current through the loop)}/\epsilon_0 \displaystyle+\frac{d }{d t}\text{(Flux of $\mathbf{E}$ through the loop)} |
| Conservation of charge |  |  |
| \displaystyle\mathbf{d}iv{\mathbf{j}}=-\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t} | \text{(Flux of current through a closed surface)} =\displaystyle-\frac{d }{d t}\text{(Charge inside)} |  |
| Force law |  |  |
| \mathbf{F}=q(\mathbf{E}+\mathbf{v}\times\mathbf{B}) |  |  |
| Law of motion |  |  |
| \displaystyle\frac{d }{d t}(\mathbf{p})=\mathbf{F}, \text{ where }\displaystyle\mathbf{p}=\frac{m\mathbf{v}}{\sqrt{1-v^2/c^2}}\; | (Newton’s law, with Einstein’s modification) |  |
| Gravitation |  |  |
| \displaystyle\mathbf{F}=-G\,\frac{m_1m_2}{r^2}\,\mathbf{e}_r |  |  |

The first equation—that the divergence of \mathbf{E} is the charge density over \epsilon_0 —is true in general. In dynamic as well as in static fields, Gauss’ law is always valid. The flux of \mathbf{E} through any closed surface is proportional to the charge inside. The third equation is the corresponding general law for magnetic fields. Since there are no magnetic charges, the flux of \mathbf{B} through any closed surface is always zero. The second equation, that the curl of \mathbf{E} is -\frac{\partial \mathbf{B}}{\partial t} , is Faraday’s law and was discussed in the last two chapters. It also is generally true. The last equation has something new. We have seen before only the part of it which holds for steady currents. In that case we said that the curl of \mathbf{B} is \mathbf{j}/\epsilon_0 c^2 , but the correct general equation has a new part that was discovered by Maxwell.

Until Maxwell’s work, the known laws of electricity and magnetism were those we have studied in Chapters 3 through 17. In particular, the equation for the magnetic field of steady currents was known only as

\mathbf{c}url{\mathbf{B}}=\frac{\mathbf{j}}{\epsilon_0 c^2}. (18.1)

Maxwell began by considering these known laws and expressing them as differential equations, as we have done here. (Although the \boldsymbol{\nabla} notation was not yet invented, it is mainly due to Maxwell that the importance of the combinations of derivatives, which we today call the curl and the divergence, first became apparent.) He then noticed that there was something strange about Eq. ( 18.1). If one takes the divergence of this equation, the left-hand side will be zero, because the divergence of a curl is always zero. So this equation requires that the divergence of \mathbf{j} also be zero. But if the divergence of \mathbf{j} is zero, then the total flux of current out of any closed surface is also zero.

The flux of current from a closed surface is the decrease of the charge inside the surface. This certainly cannot in general be zero because we know that the charges can be moved from one place to another. The equation

\mathbf{d}iv{\mathbf{j}}=-\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t} (18.2)

has, in fact, been almost our definition of \mathbf{j} . This equation expresses the very fundamental law that electric charge is conserved—any flow of charge must come from some supply. Maxwell appreciated this difficulty and proposed that it could be avoided by adding the term \frac{\partial \mathbf{E}}{\partial t} to the right-hand side of Eq. ( 18.1); he then got the fourth equation in Table 18–1 :

\text{IV.}\quad c^2\mathbf{c}url{\mathbf{B}}=\frac{\mathbf{j}}{\epsilon_0}+\frac{\partial \mathbf{E}}{\partial t}.

It was not yet customary in Maxwell’s time to think in terms of abstract fields. Maxwell discussed his ideas in terms of a model in which the vacuum was like an elastic solid. He also tried to explain the meaning of his new equation in terms of the mechanical model. There was much reluctance to accept his theory, first because of the model, and second because there was at first no experimental justification. Today, we understand better that what counts are the equations themselves and not the model used to get them. We may only question whether the equations are true or false. This is answered by doing experiments, and untold numbers of experiments have confirmed Maxwell’s equations. If we take away the scaffolding he used to build it, we find that Maxwell’s beautiful edifice stands on its own. He brought together all of the laws of electricity and magnetism and made one complete and beautiful theory.

Let us show that the extra term is just what is required to straighten out the difficulty Maxwell discovered. Taking the divergence of his equation (IV in Table 18–1 ), we must have that the divergence of the right-hand side is zero:

\mathbf{d}iv{\frac{\mathbf{j}}{\epsilon_0}}+\mathbf{d}iv{\frac{\partial \mathbf{E}}{\partial t}}=0. (18.3)

In the second term, the order of the derivatives with respect to coordinates and time can be reversed, so the equation can be rewritten as

\mathbf{d}iv{\mathbf{j}}+\epsilon_0\,\frac{\partial }{\partial t}\,\mathbf{d}iv{\mathbf{E}}=0. (18.4)

But the first of Maxwell’s equations says that the divergence of \mathbf{E} is \rho/\epsilon_0 . Inserting this equality in Eq. ( 18.4), we get back Eq. ( 18.2), which we know is true. Conversely, if we accept Maxwell’s equations—and we do because no one has ever found an experiment that disagrees with them—we must conclude that charge is always conserved.

The laws of physics have no answer to the question: “What happens if a charge is suddenly created at this point—what electromagnetic effects are produced?” No answer can be given because our equations say it doesn’t happen. If it were to happen, we would need new laws, but we cannot say what they would be. We have not had the chance to observe how a world without charge conservation behaves. According to our equations, if you suddenly place a charge at some point, you had to carry it there from somewhere else. In that case, we can say what would happen.

When we added a new term to the equation for the curl of \mathbf{E} , we found that a whole new class of phenomena was described. We shall see that Maxwell’s little addition to the equation for \mathbf{c}url{\mathbf{B}} also has far-reaching consequences. We can touch on only a few of them in this chapter.
