## 18–3 All of classical physics

In Table 18–1 we have all that was known of fundamental classical physics, that is, the physics that was known by 1905. Here it all is, in one table. With these equations we can understand the complete realm of classical physics.

First we have the Maxwell equations—written in both the expanded form and the short mathematical form. Then there is the conservation of charge, which is even written in parentheses, because the moment we have the complete Maxwell equations, we can deduce from them the conservation of charge. So the table is even a little redundant. Next, we have written the force law, because having all the electric and magnetic fields doesn’t tell us anything until we know what they do to charges. Knowing \mathbf{E} and \mathbf{B} , however, we can find the force on an object with the charge q moving with velocity \mathbf{v} . Finally, having the force doesn’t tell us anything until we know what happens when a force pushes on something; we need the law of motion, which is that the force is equal to the rate of change of the momentum. (Remember? We had that in Volume I.) We even include relativity effects by writing the momentum as \mathbf{p}=m_0\mathbf{v}/\sqrt{1-v^2/c^2} .

If we really want to be complete, we should add one more law—Newton’s law of gravitation—so we put that at the end.

Therefore in one small table we have all the fundamental laws of classical physics—even with room to write them out in words and with some redundancy. This is a great moment. We have climbed a great peak. We are on the top of K2—we are nearly ready for Mount Everest, which is quantum mechanics. We have climbed the peak of a “Great Divide,” and now we can go down the other side.

We have mainly been trying to learn how to understand the equations. Now that we have the whole thing put together, we are going to study what the equations mean—what new things they say that we haven’t already seen. We’ve been working hard to get up to this point. It has been a great effort, but now we are going to have nice coasting downhill as we see all the consequences of our accomplishment.
