## 2–1 Understanding physics

The physicist needs a facility in looking at problems from several points of view. The exact analysis of real physical problems is usually quite complicated, and any particular physical situation may be too complicated to analyze directly by solving the differential equation. But one can still get a very good idea of the behavior of a system if one has some feel for the character of the solution in different circumstances. Ideas such as the field lines, capacitance, resistance, and inductance are, for such purposes, very useful. So we will spend much of our time analyzing them. In this way we will get a feel as to what should happen in different electromagnetic situations. On the other hand, none of the heuristic models, such as field lines, is really adequate and accurate for all situations. There is only one precise way of presenting the laws, and that is by means of differential equations. They have the advantage of being fundamental and, so far as we know, precise. If you have learned the differential equations you can always go back to them. There is nothing to unlearn.

It will take you some time to understand what should happen in different circumstances. You will have to solve the equations. Each time you solve the equations, you will learn something about the character of the solutions. To keep these solutions in mind, it will be useful also to study their meaning in terms of field lines and of other concepts. This is the way you will really “understand” the equations. That is the difference between mathematics and physics. Mathematicians, or people who have very mathematical minds, are often led astray when “studying” physics because they lose sight of the physics. They say: “Look, these differential equations—the Maxwell equations—are all there is to electrodynamics; it is admitted by the physicists that there is nothing which is not contained in the equations. The equations are complicated, but after all they are only mathematical equations and if I understand them mathematically inside out, I will understand the physics inside out.” Only it doesn’t work that way. Mathematicians who study physics with that point of view—and there have been many of them—usually make little contribution to physics and, in fact, little to mathematics. They fail because the actual physical situations in the real world are so complicated that it is necessary to have a much broader understanding of the equations.

What it means really to understand an equation—that is, in more than a strictly mathematical sense—was described by Dirac. He said: “I understand what an equation means if I have a way of figuring out the characteristics of its solution without actually solving it.” So if we have a way of knowing what should happen in given circumstances without actually solving the equations, then we “understand” the equations, as applied to these circumstances. A physical understanding is a completely unmathematical, imprecise, and inexact thing, but absolutely necessary for a physicist.

Ordinarily, a course like this is given by developing gradually the physical ideas—by starting with simple situations and going on to more and more complicated situations. This requires that you continuously forget things you previously learned—things that are true in certain situations, but which are not true in general. For example, the “law” that the electrical force depends on the square of the distance is not always true. We prefer the opposite approach. We prefer to take first the complete laws, and then to step back and apply them to simple situations, developing the physical ideas as we go along. And that is what we are going to do.

Our approach is completely opposite to the historical approach in which one develops the subject in terms of the experiments by which the information was obtained. But the subject of physics has been developed over the past 200 years by some very ingenious people, and as we have only a limited time to acquire our knowledge, we cannot possibly cover everything they did. Unfortunately one of the things that we shall have a tendency to lose in these lectures is the historical, experimental development. It is hoped that in the laboratory some of this lack can be corrected. You can also fill in what we must leave out by reading the Encyclopedia Britannica, which has excellent historical articles on electricity and on other parts of physics. You will also find historical information in many textbooks on electricity and magnetism.
