## 9–3 Origin of the atmospheric currents

We must next talk about the source of the large negative currents which must be flowing from the “top” to the surface of the earth to keep charging it up negatively. Where are the batteries that do this? The “battery” is shown in Fig. 9–6 . It is the thunderstorm and its lightning. It turns out that the bolts of lightning do not “discharge” the potential we have been talking about (as you might at first guess). Lightning storms carry negative charges to the earth. When a lightning bolt strikes, nine times out of ten it brings down negative charges to the earth in large amounts. It is the thunderstorms throughout the world that are charging the earth with an average of 1800 amperes, which is then being discharged through regions of fair weather.

### Figure Ch9-F6
Caption: Fig. 9–6.The mechanism that generates atmospheric electric field. [Photo by William L. Widmayer.]
Image: figures/Ch9-F6.jpg
![Fig. 9–6.The mechanism that generates atmospheric electric field. [Photo by William L. Widmayer.]](figures/Ch9-F6.jpg)

There are about 40{,}000 thunderstorms per day all over the earth, and we can think of them as batteries pumping the electricity to the upper layer and maintaining the voltage difference. Then take into account the geography of the earth—there are thunderstorms in the afternoon in Brazil, tropical thunderstorms in Africa, and so forth. People have made estimates of how much lightning is striking world-wide at any time, and perhaps needless to say, their estimates more or less agree with the voltage difference measurements: the total amount of thunderstorm activity is highest on the whole earth at about 7:00 p.m. in London. However, the thunderstorm estimates are very difficult to make and were made only after it was known that the variation should have occurred. These things are very difficult because we don’t have enough observations on the seas and over all parts of the world to know the number of thunderstorms accurately. But those people who think they “do it right” obtain the result that there are about 100 lightning flashes per second world-wide with a peak in the activity at 7:00 p.m. Greenwich Mean Time.

In order to understand how these batteries work, we will look at a thunderstorm in detail. What is going on inside a thunderstorm? We will describe this insofar as it is known. As we get into this marvelous phenomenon of real nature—instead of the idealized spheres of perfect conductors inside of other spheres that we can solve so neatly—we discover that we don’t know very much. Yet it is really quite exciting. Anyone who has been in a thunderstorm has enjoyed it, or has been frightened, or at least has had some emotion. And in those places in nature where we get an emotion, we find that there is generally a corresponding complexity and mystery about it. It is not going to be possible to describe exactly how a thunderstorm works, because we do not yet know very much. But we will try to describe a little bit about what happens.
